Computer Science: HashMap Project (#26518)
TheOdinProject/curriculum: javascript/computer_science/hash_map_data_structure.md

### Introduction

One of the most used data structure across programming languages is a hash table, aka hash map. If you've worked with JavaScript Object Literal (`{}`), `Set`, or `Map`, then you have used structures based on hash tables. But how do they work internally? How can we save key value pairs and later retrieve them?

In this lesson, you will learn how it all works, and even implement your own hash map in the next project! To start, here is a brief description of a hash map: a hash map takes in a key value pair, produces a hash code, and stores the pair in a bucket. Hash codes? Buckets? What? Don't fret, we'll learn all about these concepts and more. Buckle up and let's dive in!

### Lesson overview

By the end of this lesson, you will learn about:

- Hash codes and how to generate them.
- Hash maps and how they work internally.

> - Turning the concept of hashing into a data structure.

Author: That can be removed, It actually took work to come up with this sentence because I felt the list was a little short lol

<div class="lesson-note lesson-note--tip" markdown="1">
Hashing is very good for security, given a password you can save the hash of that password, but if someone steals your hashes they cannot know the original passwords since they are unable to reverse the hash back to the password.
</div>

#### Use cases

What can we do with those hashes? You have probably seen it in school where a folder is organized into smaller folders, and each folder holds information about people with the same first letter:

```
C:
  carlos.txt
  carla.txt
B:
  bryan.txt
  bob.txt
  beatrice.txt
  bella.txt
  benjamin.txt
  bianca.txt
```

If we get new student in our school with the name `"Carlos"`, we can run our hash function to find out which folder to place them in. `hash("Carlos") -> "C"` so we put `"Carlos"` in the directory labeled `C`.

> You might have spotted a problem: what if our school is populated with many people whose names share the same first letter `C`? Then we will have a directory labeled `C` that holds too many names while other directories could be empty. To eliminate this duplication and better separate our students, we need to rework our hash function while still maintaining a constant folder structure.

Author: We did, must have missed changing it with all the problems that are surfacing. Will get to it when i work on the rest

```javascript
function stringToNumber(string) {
  let hashCode = 0;

  const primeNumber = 31;
  for (let i = 0; i < string.length; i++) {
    hashCode = primeNumber * hashCode + string.charCodeAt(i);
  }

  return hashCode;
}
```

With our new function we will have different hash codes for the names `"Sara"` and `"raSa"` that is because even if both names have the same letters, some of the letters appear in different locations. The hash code started to change because we are multiplying the old hash every new iteration and then adding the letter code.

<div class="lesson-note lesson-note--tip" markdown="1">
  Notice the usage of prime number. We could have chosen any number we wanted, but prime numbers are even better to introduce less hash codes that are divisible by the same bucket length, which will make collisions less likely to happen.
</div>

Even though we reworked our hash function to avoid the `"Sara"/"raSa"` collision, there is always the possibility for collisions. Since we have a finite number of buckets, there is no way to eliminate collisions entirely. Let's try to minimize them.

#### Dealing with collisions

> Up until now, our hash map is a one-dimensional data structure. What if each `Node` inside the bucket can store more than one value? Enters `Linked Lists`. Now, each `Node` inside the bucket is also a Linked List. When inserting to a bucket, if it's empty, we insert the head of Linked List. If a `Node` head exists in a bucket, we follow that Linked List to add to the end of it.

Reviewer: > Now, each `Node` inside the bucket is also a Linked List. 

Now that I'm reading it again, this phrase might come off as confusing. We could just say, 

> Now, each bucket will be a Linked List. 

What are your thoughts on this?
```suggestion
Up until now, our hash map is a one-dimensional data structure. What if each `Node` inside the bucket can store more than one value? Enters `Linked Lists`. Now, each bucket will be a Linked List. When inserting to a bucket, if it's empty, we insert the head of Linked List. If a head exists in a bucket, we follow that Linked List to add to the end of it.
```

For example, if we are to find the bucket where the value `"Manon"` will land, then we do the following:
![hashing using hash code and modular operation example](./hash_map_data_structure/imgs/01.png)

If we keep adding nodes into our buckets then the buckets will start filling up, but what is more important is we know for a fact that if almost all buckets have items in them, then collisions are guaranteed, it is mathematically impossible not to.

Remember we don't want collisions, in a perfect world each bucket will either have 0 or 1 Node only, so we grow our buckets to have more chance that our Nodes will spread and not stack up in the same buckets. To grow our buckets, we create a new buckets list that is double the size of the old buckets list, then we copy all nodes over to the new buckets.

#### When do we know that it's time to grow our buckets size

To deal with this, our hash map class need to keep track of two new fields, the `capacity` and the `load factor`.

- The `capacity` is the total number of buckets we currently have. Keeping track of this will let us know if our map has reached a certain threshold aka `load factor`,

> - The `load factor` is a number that we can assign our hash map to at the start. It's the factor that will determine when is it a good time to grow our buckets, for example a load factor of `0.75` means our hash map will need to grow its buckets when the capacity reaches 75% full. Setting it too low will consume too much memory by having too many empty buckets, while setting it too high will allow our buckets to have many collisions before we grow them. Usually a good balance of `0.75 to 1` is used.

Reviewer: IMO we can remove the phrase. "Usually a good ...". I don't think it serves any purpose, what do you think?
```suggestion
- The `load factor` is a number that we can assign our hash map to at the start. It's the factor that will determine when is it a good time to grow our buckets, for example a load factor of `0.75` means our hash map will need to grow its buckets when the capacity reaches 75% full. Setting it too low will consume too much memory by having too many empty buckets, while setting it too high will allow our buckets to have many collisions before we grow them.
```

Author: It can be reworded, but I feel letting people know that there is a conventional `sweet spot` of where a good balanced load factor can be. Rather than people just deciding a random number to be their load factor

Reviewer: I'm curious about the 0.75-1 figure. I feel it's just easier to reword it as "Many hash map implementations use a default load factor of `0.75`"

Author: Why wouldn't we recommend the load factor to be between 0.75 and 1? I don't understand the reason we trying to avoid that. Saying many hash map implementation uses 0.75 is also not very accurate, as the number varies, but it's usually between 0.75 and 1.
Rust: 0.9
Java : 0.75
C#: 1

Do you have any reason to believe that this number is not optimal between space and performance complexities?

Reviewer: I just thought giving a range of load factors might overwhelm the learners. But thanks for digging in and providing load factors in different languages. Let's put it in. My wording suggestion: "Hash map implementations across various languages use a load factor between 0.75 and 1" You can tweak the wording of course.

Reviewer: I'm looking at load factors in different languages. Go has 6.5 if I'm reading it right https://github.com/golang/go/blob/fbfc203/src/runtime/hashmap.go#L67

Author: 6.5 felt way too big and gonna have on average 6 collisions per bucket on average so something felt wrong and I did some digging. I think they use a load factor differently than our implementation they go with 6.5 out of 8 buckets so around 81% you can see the math here with 13 (double of load factor) divided by 16 (double of 8 buckets)
 check out this line here https://github.com/golang/go/blob/9b4b3e5acca2dabe107fa2c3ed963097d78a4562/src/runtime/map.go#L69C1-L69C1
 
 If that is true then in our implementation Go would have a load factor of 0.8

Reviewer: Cool cool, I really can't understand code written in these repos lol Thank God for the comments 😆 

 This article (https://rcoh.me/posts/hash-map-analysis/) does say 6.5 for Go. Interestingly Ruby does load factor of 0.5 and uses an array instead of linked lists for buckets https://github.com/ruby/ruby/blob/master/st.c#L9

Author: I still find it really hard to believe a language would allow up to 6 pairs per bucket, that is too much performance hit to save memory, especially now days that memory is cheap. Unless their implementation is vastly different than a normal hash map.

  }

  return hashCode;
}

function hash(name, surname) {
  return stringToNumber(name) + stringToNumber(surname);
}
```

We not only consider the first letters with this technique. Instead, we take the entire name and convert it into numbers.

You might be thinking, wouldn't it be just better to save the whole name as a hash code? That is true. This would make it unique for each name, but in the context of hash maps, we need hash code to be a number. This number will serve as the index to the bucket that will store the key value pair. More on buckets in the next section.

### Buckets

Buckets are storage that we need to store our elements. Simply, it's an array. For a specific key, we decide which bucket to use for storage through our hash function. Hash function returns a number which serves as the index of the array at which we store this specific key value pair. Let's say we need to store a key "Fred":

1. Pass "Fred" into the hash function to get the hash code which is `508`
1. Find the bucket at index `508`
1. Store the key value pair in that bucket.

This is an oversimplified explanation; we'll discuss more internal mechanics later in the lesson.

> To get a value using a key, we put each entry inside a bucket as a `Node` item, which hold both the key and the value. To retrieve the value we hash a key, we find the bucket number, if the bucket is not empty then we go to that bucket we compare if the Node's key is the same key that is already in the bucket, if it is then we retrieve the Node's value otherwise we return null.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To get a value using a key, we put each entry inside a bucket as a `Node` item, which holds both the key and the value. To retrieve the value, we hash the key and calculate its bucket number. If the bucket is not empty, then we go to that bucket and compare if the Node's key is the same key that is already in the bucket. If it is, then we can return the Node's value. Otherwise, we return null.
```

Maybe you are wondering, why are we comparing the keys if we already found the index of that bucket? That is because remember, hash code is just the location, different keys might generate the same hash code. We need to make sure the key is the same by comparing both keys that are inside the bucket.

This is it, making this will result in a hash table with `has`, `set` and `get`.

What if we found the hash code, but also the key value is the same as what we already have in the bucket. We check if it's the same item by comparing the keys, then we overwrite the value with our new value. This is how we can only have unique values inside a `Set`, `Set` is similar to a hash map but the key difference (pun intended) is that a `Set` will have Nodes with only keys and no values.

#### Insertion order is not maintained

> A hash map does not guarantee insertion order when you iterate over it. Hash codes translation to indexes does not go in linear fashion from first to last index, and rather more chaotic of where the index going to be no matter the insert order. That means if you are to retrieve the array of keys and values to iterate over them, then they will not be in order of when you inserted them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A hash map does not guarantee insertion order when you iterate over it. The translation of hash codes to indexes does not follow a linear progression from the first to the last index. Instead, it is more unpredictable, irrespective of the order in which items are inserted. That means if you are to retrieve the array of keys and values to iterate over them, then they will not be in order of when you inserted them.
```

Some libraries implement hash tables with insertion order in mind such as JavaScript's own `Map`. For this project however we will be implementing an unordered hash table.
Example: if we insert the values `Mao`, `Zach`, `Xari` in this order, we may get back `["Zach", "Mao", "Xari"]` when we call an iterator.

If iterating over the hash map frequently is your goal, then this data structure is not the right choice for the job, a simple array would be better.

### Collisions

We have another problem that we need to deal with: collisions. A collision occurs when two different keys generate the exact same hash code. Because they have the same hash code, they will land in the same bucket.

Let's take an example: hashing the name `"Sara"` and the name `"raSa"` will generate the same hash code. That is because the letters in both names are the same, just arranged differently.

> We can rework our `stringToNumber` function so that it can give us unique hash codes which depends on where the letter appear in the name using an algorithm.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can rework our `stringToNumber` function so that it can give us unique hash codes that depend on where the letters appear in the name using an algorithm.
```

```javascript
function stringToNumber(string) {
  let hashCode = 0;

  const primeNumber = 31;
  for (let i = 0; i < string.length; i++) {
    hashCode = primeNumber * hashCode + string.charCodeAt(i);
  }

  return hashCode;
}
```

> With our new function we will have different hash codes for the names `"Sara"` and `"raSa"` that is because even if both names have the same letters, some of the letters appear in different locations. The hash code started to change because we are multiplying the old hash every new iteration and then adding the letter code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With our new function we will have different hash codes for the names `"Sara"` and `"raSa"`. This is because even if both names have the same letters, some of the letters appear in different locations. The hash code started to change because we are multiplying the old hash every new iteration and then adding the letter code.
```

<div class="lesson-note lesson-note--tip" markdown="1">

>   Notice the usage of prime number. We could have chosen any number we wanted, but prime numbers are even better to introduce less hash codes that are divisible by the same bucket length, which will make collisions less likely to happen.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Notice the usage of a prime number. We could have chosen any number we wanted, but prime numbers are preferable. Multiplying by a prime number will reduce the likelihood of hash codes being evenly divisible by the bucket length, which helps minimize the occurrence of collisions.
```

#### Dealing with collisions

Up until now, our hash map is a one-dimensional data structure. What if each `Node` inside the bucket can store more than one value? Enters `Linked Lists`. Now, each bucket will be a Linked List. When inserting to a bucket, if it's empty, we insert the head of Linked List. If a head exists in a bucket, we follow that Linked List to add to the end of it.

You probably understand by this point why we must write a good hashing function which eliminates as many collisions as possible. Most likely you will not be writing your own hash functions, as most languages have it built in. But understanding how hash functions work is important.

### Growth of a hash table

Let's talk about the growth of our buckets. We don't have infinite memory, so we can't have an infinite amount of buckets. We need to start somewhere, but starting too big is also a waste of memory if we're only going to have a hash map with a single value in it. So to deal with this issue, we should start with a small array for our buckets. We'll use an array size `16`.

<div class="lesson-note lesson-note--tip" markdown="1">

>   Most programming languages start with the default size of `16` because it's a power of 2, which help with some techniques for performance that require bit manipulation for indexes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Most programming languages start with the default size of `16` because it's a power of 2, which helps with some techniques for performance that require bit manipulation for indexes.
```

For example, if we are to find the bucket where the value `"Manon"` will land, then we do the following:
![hashing using hash code and modular operation example](./hash_map_data_structure/imgs/01.png)

If we keep adding nodes into our buckets then the buckets will start filling up, but what is more important is we know for a fact that if almost all buckets have items in them, then collisions are guaranteed, it is mathematically impossible not to.

Remember we don't want collisions, in a perfect world each bucket will either have 0 or 1 Node only, so we grow our buckets to have more chance that our Nodes will spread and not stack up in the same buckets. To grow our buckets, we create a new buckets list that is double the size of the old buckets list, then we copy all nodes over to the new buckets.

#### When do we know that it's time to grow our buckets size

To deal with this, our hash map class need to keep track of two new fields, the `capacity` and the `load factor`.

- The `capacity` is the total number of buckets we currently have. Keeping track of this will let us know if our map has reached a certain threshold aka `load factor`,

> - The `load factor` is a number that we can assign our hash map to at the start. It's the factor that will determine when is it a good time to grow our buckets, for example a load factor of `0.75` means our hash map will need to grow its buckets when the capacity reaches 75% full. Setting it too low will consume too much memory by having too many empty buckets, while setting it too high will allow our buckets to have many collisions before we grow them. Hash map implementations across various languages use a load factor between `0.75` and `1`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The `load factor` is a number that we can assign our hash map to at the start. It's the factor that will determine when is it a good time to grow our buckets. For example, a load factor of `0.75` means our hash map will need to grow its buckets when the capacity reaches 75% full. Setting it too low will consume too much memory by having too many empty buckets, while setting it too high will allow our buckets to have many collisions before we grow them. Hash map implementations across various languages use a load factor between `0.75` and `1`.
```
